hi everyone welcome to weekly insights
in a previous video I described
narcissistic abuse as a relational
dynamic in which one person exploits or
uses another in a way that negates their
subjectivity their complex full Humanity
in order to meet their own self-esteem
needs prominent theorists consider this
form of abuse to be pathogenic of NPD
when it's done to small children
representing the original narcissistic
wound around which the maladaptive false
self and grandiose compensations are
built the child grows into an adult who
does not recognize their own complex
subjectivity and who also struggles to
treat other people as subjects rather
than
objects as the individual does to others
what was originally done to them they
create narcissistic wounding in their
Partners children and other important
relationships over time the injuries
propagate outward perpet uating cycles
of devaluation and harm at the core of
pathological narcissism is profound
psychological injury genetic
vulnerabilities and innate sensitivities
in the child are compounded upon and
exploited by caregivers to gratify their
own narcissistic strivings for for
validation and mirroring the child's
authentic emotional and attachment needs
are displaced in favor of the centrality
of the caregivers needs the child is
used as an auxiliary source of
self-esteem when the child behaves in a
way that runs counter to what the
caregiver wants or needs they are
sometimes dismissed criticized or mocked
and that leads to distorted
internalizations that disrupt the
development of a realistic and stable
self-experience such treatment is
traumatic the child protects themselves
by constructing a protective structure a
defensive personality constellation
that's designed to Shield the self from
overwhelming feelings of vulnerability
shame or
inadequacy however this defense comes at
a terrible cost the capacity to see and
appreciate the full complex Humanity of
both themselves and other people
everything becomes about the pressure
inside to feel seen validated accepted
and
understood this adaptation is typically
accompanied by the Persistence of
immature defenses like splitting that
skew perceptions of the self and others
fragmenting them into polarized extremes
of good and bad idealized and
devalued the ability to appreciate
nuance and complexity in the self and
other people is compromised such as the
pressure to be a good self that meets
the conditional approval of the
narcissistically preoccupied
caregiver devalued parts of the self are
projected onto others who are perceived
as bad objects who are are then
criticized mocked shamed or humiliated
and this process mirrors the poor or
insensitive treatment to which the child
was subjected whenever they failed to
meet the caregiver's
expectations these Dynamics often
persist into adulthood forming the basis
of what is often called narcissistic
abuse where family members or
significant others are unconsciously
treated by the individual as objects
that are either good or bad pleasing and
gratifying or disappointing Ing and
contempt and this is actually a
recapitulation of what was done to the
person with NPD when they were young
thus narcissistic abuse that was done to
the child is now enacted by the grown
individual they unconsciously do to
others what was done to them but it
doesn't stop there the person on the
receiving end of this treatment is
pushed into a similarly defensive
posture they find themselves fighting
for the legitimacy of their own selfhood
their goodness their worth their
perception of themselves is slowly
distorted into polarities of good and
bad valuable and worthless mirroring the
internal struggle of the individual with
NPD this Dynamic can be profoundly
disorienting many people in these
relationships become consumed by a
desperate need to prove their basic
decency especially when the person with
NPD has projected their own unbearable
feelings of inadequacy onto them making
them feel as though they're flawed or
broken the person feels like something
has been taken from them having spent so
long in a distorted inner personal
reality in which their subjectivity was
devalued or ignored and in which they
were treated as an extension of someone
else they're often angry enraged even
they're hungry for validation and easily
triggered into feeling criticized we
could say that now they are also
narcissistically wounded the effects of
this wounding depend on the individual
and on the nature of the
relationship some are more resilient
having been raised with a secure base
and a strong but flexible self-image but
such individuals also tend to recognize
and therefore avoid dysfunctional
situations instead it's often
individuals who already have
vulnerability to dysfunctional dynamics
that end up gravitating toward
relationships where such dysfunctions
will be repeated when they finally leave
such relationships they're often angry
depleted and desperate to restore a
sense of
self and thus the narcissistic wounding
can continue to
propagate they may find themselves
turning to online forums voicing their
pain in ways that categorically
dehumanize and invalidate the struggles
of other people strangers they've never
met and onto whom they now project the
bad feelings inside of them that they're
desperate to
expel they seek to reassert their own
goodness by identifying another group of
people as irredeemable or even evil now
it's completely understandable to turn
to forums or communities for support but
some discussions can inadvertently
reinforce polarized thinking this harm
propagates because our minds seek
equilibrium being devalued or used
narcissistically creates unbearable
psychic tension it creates narrow
internal spaces where there seems to be
only two options either the self is good
or it's bad to achieve alignment with a
good self-image anything bad inside must
be expelled via projection or other
defense mechanisms and it has a net
result of dehumanizing everyone
involved I started this channel in an
attempt to break the cycle that I was
seeing online first the narcissist is
hurt as a child then the hurt propagates
to others then those others turn to
forums or videos that validate their
anger while trapping them in the same
cycle of polarized thinking and
dehumanization I want to emphasize that
anger and self- protection are natural
and adaptive responses to such a
experiences anger can be a powerful tool
for reclaiming boundaries and dignity
but like all tools it can also be
counterproductive when overused or
misdirected there's an important
difference between adaptive anger and
stagnating anger that's anger that
actually Keeps Us locked in our pain my
aim here is to create understanding
rather than
polarization to spread nuanced
compassionate representations of the
humanity Behind These Dynamics in
narcissism and narcissistic abuse the
humanity of both parties has been
compromised by the same Dynamic and the
tendency of that Dynamic is to spread
regardless of which Link in the chain
you currently occupy the one who was
wounded as a child or the one who was
wounded in an adult relationship with
someone who was wounded as a child The
Way Forward is always to lean into
complexity
Healing Begins when we can hold both
truths
simultaneously the hurt you experienced
is real and unjust and your reactions
are understandable responses to profound
pain at the same time the person causing
it was also shaped by harm that they
could not process acknowledging this
cycle doesn't mean excusing the harm you
experienced it simply helps us
understand the larger patterns that at
play and hopefully to find a way out of
them hurt people hurt people and now
that you are also a hurt person the
answer isn't to dehumanize others in the
hopes that doing so will somehow restore
what you feel was taken from you it also
means recognizing when our own defensive
reactions have begun to mirror the very
patterns we want to escape if you find
yourself consumed with proving your own
goodness by attacking or labeling others
whether or not they have NPD it may be
worth asking where do you still feel
unseen unworthy or
hurt healing is not about identifying
villains it's about reclaiming your full
self your complexity your worth and your
ability to Define your own path moving
forward all right so that's it for today
this video is part of a weekly series
for paid subscribers to the channel so
if you found it helpful and if you'd
like to receive more videos like this on
a weekly basis consider becoming a paid
subscriber until next time take good
care
[Music]